+++
date = 2018-01-05T00:00:00  # Schedule page publish date.

title = "Monitoring and Modeling Family Eating Dynamics (M2FED): A sensor system to detect dietary mimicry in families"
time_start = 2018-04-12T16:30:00
time_end = 2018-04-12T16:45:00
abstract = "BACKGROUND: Evidence shows that family relationships and systems influence eating behavior and ultimately health risks (e. g. , obesity). Child and adolescent eating habits and preferences are predominantly learned in family settings, although influence processes may be bidirectional. A key mechanism of interpersonal influence on eating behavior may be unconscious behavioral mimicry: when two or more people engage in the same behavior at the same time. There is evidence of dietary mimicry in strangers and mother-daughter pairs, but research has not yet explored dietary mimicry in entire families. This study examined whether family members mimicked the bites of each other in real time. METHODS: M2FED is a cyber-physical system being developed to detect family eating behavior and other proximal determinants in the home environment with wearable and in-home sensors. To develop accurate algorithms for detecting eating via a smart watch, 22 participants from 7 families (7 parents: M age = 40 yrs; and 15 children: M age = 15 yrs) wore a smart watch on their dominant wrist and were videotaped while eating an unstructured meal with their family. Each videotape was coded for bite occurrence and bite time. These analyses test for associations in the number of bites and bite frequency among pairs of family members (n = 24 dyads, n = 1361 bites). RESULTS: Significant differences in total bites and eating rates (bites per minute) were not found between parents and children. However, younger children had a faster average eating rate than older children (2. 4 vs 1. 9 bpm), and males took more total bites than females (78. 6 vs 55. 2).  There was a significant positive correlation in total bites between dyad members (r = 0. 65, p < 0. 001) and a trend towards a significant positive correlation in eating rates (r = 0. 33, p = 0. 10).  The extent to which dyads were similar in their total bites and eating rates did not differ between child-child dyads and child-parent dyads (t = 0. 60, p > 0. 05). CONCLUSION: This pilot study provides preliminary evidence that the eating behaviors among pairs of family members are positively associated when they are co-engaged in an unstructured meal. These analyses will inform systems modeling of family eating dynamics over time (i.e., weeks, months) to identify temporal patterns of eating mimicry and broader synchrony of eating behaviors and other proximal determinants (mood, social interaction) using rich and contextualized data collected via our M2FED sensor system from multiple families in their homes."
abstract_short = ""
event = "39th Annual Meeting of the Society of Behavioral Medicine"
event_url = ""
location = "New Orleans, LA"

# Is this a selected talk? (true/false)
selected = false

# Projects (optional).
#   Associate this talk with one or more of your projects.
#   Simply enter the filename (excluding '.md') of your project file in `content/project/`.
#projects = [""]

# Links (optional).
url_pdf = ""
url_slides = "https://www.dropbox.com/s/9e1n75bpxgdbhek/BM%20Bell%20SBM%20slides%204.12.18%20FINAL.pdf?dl=0"
url_video = ""
url_code = ""

# Does the content use math formatting?
math = true

# Does the content use source code highlighting?
highlight = true

# Featured image
# Place your image in the `static/img/` folder and reference its filename below, e.g. `image = "example.jpg"`.
[header]
image = ""
caption = ""

+++
